Playing the Game
Rhythm of Play
The three main pillars of D&D play are social interaction, exploration, and combat. Whichever one
you’re experiencing, the game unfolds according to
this basic pattern:

1: The Game Master Describes a Scene. The GM
tells the players where their adventurers are and
what’s around them (how many doors lead out of
a room, what’s on a table, and so on).
2: The Players Describe What Their Characters
Do. Typically, the characters stick together as
they travel through a dungeon or another environment. Sometimes different adventurers do
different things: one adventurer might search a
treasure chest while a second examines a mysterious symbol engraved on a wall and a third
keeps watch for monsters. Outside combat, the
GM ensures that every character has a chance to
act and decides how to resolve their activity. In
combat, the characters take turns.
3: The GM Narrates the Results of the Adventurers’ Actions. Sometimes resolving a task is easy.
If an adventurer walks across a room and tries to
open a door, the GM might say the door opens and
describe what lies beyond. But the door might be
locked, the floor might hide a trap, or some other
circumstance might make it challenging for an
adventurer to complete a task. In those cases, the
GM might ask the player to roll a die to help determine what happens. Describing the results often leads to another decision point, which brings
the game back to step 1.
This pattern holds during every game session
(each time you sit down to play D&D), whether the

Exceptions Supersede General Rules

General rules govern each part of the game. For
example, the combat rules tell you that melee attacks use Strength and ranged attacks use Dexterity.
That’s a general rule, and a general rule is in effect as
long as something in the game doesn’t explicitly say
otherwise.
The game also includes elements—class features,
feats, weapon properties, spells, magic items, monster abilities, and the like—that sometimes contradict a general rule. When an exception and a general
rule disagree, the exception wins. For example, if a
feature says you can make melee attacks using your
Charisma, you can do so, even though that statement
disagrees with the general rule.

5

System Reference Document 5.2.1

adventurers are talking to a noble, exploring a ruin,
or fighting a dragon. In certain situations—particularly combat—the action is more structured, and
everyone takes turns.

The Six Abilities

All creatures—characters and monsters—have six
abilities that measure physical and mental characteristics, as shown on the Ability Descriptions table.

Ability Descriptions
Ability

Score Measures …

Strength

Physical might

Dexterity

Agility, reflexes, and balance

Constitution

Health and stamina

Intelligence

Reasoning and memory

Wisdom

Perceptiveness and mental fortitude

Charisma

Confidence, poise, and charm

Ability Scores
Each ability has a score from 1 to 20, although some
monsters have a score as high as 30. The score
represents the magnitude of an ability. The Ability
Scores table summarizes what the scores mean.

Ability Scores
Score

Meaning

1

This is the lowest a score can normally go.
If an effect reduces a score to 0, that effect
explains what happens.

2–9

This represents a weak capability.

10–11

This represents the human average.

12–19

This represents a strong capability.

20

This is the highest an adventurer’s score can
go unless a feature says otherwise.

21–29

This represents an extraordinary capability.

30

This is the highest a score can go.

Ability Modifiers
Each ability has a modifier that you apply whenever
you make a D20 Test with that ability (explained in
“D20 Tests”). An ability modifier is derived from its
score, as shown in the Ability Modifiers table.

Round Down
Whenever you divide or multiply a number in the
game, round down if you end up with a fraction, even
if the fraction is one-half or greater. Some rules make
an exception and tell you to round up.

Ability Checks

Ability Modifiers
Score

Modifier

Score

Modifier

1

−5

16–17

+3

2–3

−4

18–19

+4

4–5

−3

20–21

+5

6–7

−2

22–23

+6

8–9

−1

24–25

+7

10–11

+0

26–27

+8

12–13

+1

28–29

+9

14–15

+2

30

+10

D20 Tests
When the outcome of an action is uncertain, the
game uses a d20 roll to determine success or failure. These rolls are called D20 Tests, and they come
in three kinds: ability checks, saving throws, and
attack rolls. They follow these steps:

4: Roll 1d20. You always want to roll high. If the
roll has Advantage or Disadvantage (described
later in “Playing the Game”), you roll two d20s,
but you use the number from only one of them—
the higher one if you have Advantage or the lower
one if you have Disadvantage.
5: Add Modifiers. Add these modifiers to the number rolled on the d20:

• The Relevant Ability Modifier. “Playing the
Game” and “Rules Glossary” explain which ability
modifiers to use for various D20 Tests.
• Your Proficiency Bonus If Relevant. Each creature has a Proficiency Bonus, a number added
when making a D20 Test that uses something,
such as a skill, in which the creature has proficiency. See “Proficiency” later in “Playing the
Game.”
• Circumstantial Bonuses and Penalties. A class
feature, a spell, or another rule might give a bonus
or penalty to the die roll.
6: Compare the Total to a Target Number. If the
total of the d20 and its modifiers equals or exceeds the target number, the D20 Test succeeds.
Otherwise, it fails. The Game Master determines
target numbers and tells players whether their
rolls are successful. The target number for an
ability check or a saving throw is called a Difficulty Class (DC). The target number for an attack
roll is called an Armor Class (AC), which appears
on a character sheet or in a stat block (see “Rules
Glossary”).

6

System Reference Document 5.2.1

An ability check represents a creature using talent
and training to try to overcome a challenge, such as
forcing open a stuck door, picking a lock, entertaining a crowd, or deciphering a cipher. The GM and the
rules often call for an ability check when a creature
attempts something other than an attack that has a
chance of meaningful failure. When the outcome is
uncertain and narratively interesting, the dice determine the result.

Ability Modifier

An ability check is named for the ability modifier it
uses: a Strength check, an Intelligence check, and so
on. Different ability checks are called for in different situations, depending on which ability is most
relevant. See the Ability Check Examples table for
examples of each check’s use.

Ability Check Examples
Ability

Make a Check To …

Strength

Lift, push, pull, or break something

Dexterity

Move nimbly, quickly, or quietly

Constitution

Push your body beyond normal limits

Intelligence

Reason or remember

Wisdom

Notice things in the environment or in
creatures’ behavior

Charisma

Influence, entertain, or deceive

Proficiency Bonus
Add your Proficiency Bonus to an ability check
when the GM determines that a skill or tool proficiency is relevant to the check and you have
that proficiency. For example, if a rule refers to a
Strength (Acrobatics or Athletics) check, you can
add your Proficiency Bonus to the check if you have
proficiency in the Acrobatics or Athletics skill. See
“Proficiency” later in “Playing the Game” for more
information about skill and tool proficiencies.

Difficulty Class

The Difficulty Class of an ability check represents
the task’s difficulty. The more difficult the task,
the higher its DC. The rules provide DCs for certain
checks, but the GM ultimately sets them. The Typical Difficulty Classes table presents a range of possible DCs for ability checks.

Typical Difficulty Classes
Task Difficulty

DC

Task Difficulty

DC

Very easy

5

Very hard

25

Easy

10

Nearly impossible

30

Medium

15

Hard

20

Saving Throws

Attack Roll Abilities

A saving throw—also called a save—represents an
attempt to evade or resist a threat, such as a fiery
explosion, a blast of poisonous gas, or a spell trying
to invade your mind. You don’t normally choose to
make a save; you must make one because your character or a monster (if you’re the GM) is at risk. A
save’s result is detailed in the effect that caused it.
If you don’t want to resist the effect, you can
choose to fail the save without rolling.

Ability

Attack Type

Strength

Melee attack with a weapon or an Unarmed Strike (see “Rules Glossary”)

Dexterity

Ranged attack with a weapon

Varies

Spell attack (the ability used is determined
by the spellcaster’s spellcasting feature, as
explained in “Spells”)

Ability Modifier

Saving throws are named for the ability modifiers
they use: a Constitution saving throw, a Wisdom
saving throw, and so on. Different saving throws are
used to resist different kinds of effects, as shown on
the Saving Throw Examples table.

Saving Throw Examples
Ability

Make a Save To …

Strength

Physically resist direct force

Dexterity

Dodge out of harm’s way

Constitution

Endure a toxic hazard

Intelligence

Recognize an illusion as fake

Wisdom

Resist a mental assault

Charisma

Assert your identity

Proficiency Bonus
You add your Proficiency Bonus to your saving
throw if you have proficiency in that kind of save.
See “Proficiency” later in “Playing the Game.”

Difficulty Class

The Difficulty Class for a saving throw is determined by the effect that causes it or by the GM. For
example, if a spell forces you to make a save, the DC
is determined by the caster’s spellcasting ability
and Proficiency Bonus. Monster abilities that call
for saves specify the DC.

Attack Rolls

An attack roll determines whether an attack hits
a target. An attack roll hits if the roll equals or
exceeds the target’s Armor Class. Attack rolls usually occur in battle, described in “Combat” later in
“Playing the Game,” but the GM might also ask for
an attack roll in other situations, such as an archery
competition.

Ability Modifier

The Attack Roll Abilities table shows which ability
modifier to use for different types of attack rolls.

7

System Reference Document 5.2.1

Some features let you use different ability modifiers
from those listed. For example, the Finesse property
(see “Equipment”) lets you use Strength or Dexterity with a weapon that has that property.

Proficiency Bonus

You add your Proficiency Bonus to your attack roll
when you attack using a weapon you have proficiency with, as well as when you attack with a spell.
See “Proficiency” later in “Playing the Game” for
more information about weapon proficiencies.

Armor Class

A creature’s Armor Class represents how well the
creature avoids being wounded in combat. The AC
of a character is determined at character creation
(see “Character Creation”), whereas the AC of a
monster appears in its stat block.
Calculating AC. All creatures start with the same
base AC calculation:
Base AC = 10 + the creature’s Dexterity modifier

A creature’s AC can then be modified by armor,
magic items, spells, and more.
Only One Base AC. Some spells and class features
give characters a different way to calculate their AC.
A character with multiple features that give different ways to calculate AC must choose which one to
use; only one base calculation can be in effect for a
creature.

Rolling 20 or 1

If you roll a 20 on the d20 (called a “natural 20”) for
an attack roll, the attack hits regardless of any modifiers or the target’s AC. This is called a Critical Hit
(see “Combat” later in “Playing the Game”).
If you roll a 1 on the d20 (a “natural 1”) for an attack roll, the attack misses regardless of any modifiers or the target’s AC.

Advantage/Disadvantage

Sometimes a D20 Test is modified by Advantage or
Disadvantage. Advantage reflects the positive circumstances surrounding a d20 roll, while Disadvantage reflects negative circumstances.
You usually acquire Advantage or Disadvantage
through the use of special abilities and actions. The

Heroic Inspiration

Proficiency

Sometimes the GM or a rule gives you Heroic Inspiration. If you have Heroic Inspiration, you can expend it
to reroll any die immediately after rolling it, and you
must use the new roll.
Only One at a Time. You can never have more
than one instance of Heroic Inspiration. If something
gives you Heroic Inspiration and you already have it,
you can give it to a player character in your group
who lacks it.
Gaining Heroic Inspiration. Your GM can
give you Heroic Inspiration for a variety of reasons.
Typically, GMs award it when you do something particularly heroic, in character, or entertaining. It’s a
reward for making the game more fun for everyone
playing.
Other rules might allow your character to gain
Heroic Inspiration independent of the GM’s decision.
For example, Human characters start each day with
Heroic Inspiration.

Characters and monsters are good at various
things. Some are skilled with many weapons, while
others can use only a few. Some are better at understanding people’s motives, and others are better at
unlocking the secrets of the multiverse. All creatures have a Proficiency Bonus, which reflects the
impact that training has on the creature’s capabilities. A character’s Proficiency Bonus increases as
the character gains levels (described in “Character
Creation”). A monster’s Proficiency Bonus is based
on its Challenge Rating (see “Rules Glossary”). The
Proficiency Bonus table shows how the bonus is
determined.
This bonus is applied to a D20 Test when the creature has proficiency in a skill, in a saving throw, or
with an item that the creature uses to make the D20
Test. The bonus is also used for spell attacks and for
calculating the DC of saving throws for spells.

GM can also decide that circumstances grant Advantage or impose Disadvantage.

Roll Two D20s

When a roll has either Advantage or Disadvantage,
roll a second d20 when you make the roll. Use the
higher of the two rolls if you have Advantage, and
use the lower roll if you have Disadvantage. For example, if you have Disadvantage and roll an 18 and a
3, use the 3. If you instead have Advantage and roll
those numbers, use the 18.

They Don’t Stack

If multiple situations affect a roll and they all grant
Advantage on it, you still roll only two d20s. Similarly, if multiple situations impose Disadvantage on
a roll, you roll only two d20s.
If circumstances cause a roll to have both Advantage and Disadvantage, the roll has neither of them,
and you roll one d20. This is true even if multiple
circumstances impose Disadvantage and only one
grants Advantage or vice versa. In such a situation,
you have neither Advantage nor Disadvantage.

Interactions with Rerolls

When you have Advantage or Disadvantage and
something in the game lets you reroll or replace the
d20, you can reroll or replace only one die, not both.
You choose which one.
For example, if you have Heroic Inspiration (see
the sidebar below) and roll a 3 and an 18 on an ability check that has Advantage or Disadvantage, you
could expend your Heroic Inspiration to reroll one
of those dice, not both of them.

8

System Reference Document 5.2.1

Proficiency Bonus
Level or CR

Bonus

Level or CR

Bonus

Up to 4

+2

17–20

+6

5–8

+3

21–24

+7

9–12

+4

25–28

+8

13–16

+5

29–30

+9

The Bonus Doesn’t Stack
Your Proficiency Bonus can’t be added to a die roll
or another number more than once. For example, if
a rule allows you to make a Charisma (Deception or
Persuasion) check, you add your Proficiency Bonus
if you’re proficient in either skill, but you don’t add
it twice if you’re proficient in both skills.
Occasionally, a Proficiency Bonus might be multiplied or divided (doubled or halved, for example)
before being added. For example, the Expertise
feature (see “Rules Glossary”) doubles the Proficiency Bonus for certain ability checks. Whenever
the bonus is used, it can be multiplied only once and
divided only once.

Skill Proficiencies

Most ability checks involve using a skill, which represents a category of things creatures try to do with
an ability check. The descriptions of the actions
you take (see “Actions” later in “Playing the Game”)
specify which skill applies if you make an ability
check for that action, and many other rules note
when a skill is relevant. The GM has the ultimate say
on whether a skill is relevant in a situation.
If a creature is proficient in a skill, the creature
applies its Proficiency Bonus to ability checks involving that skill. Without proficiency in a skill, a
creature can still make ability checks involving

Skills
Skill

Ability

Example Uses

Acrobatics

Dexterity

Stay on your feet in a tricky situation, or perform an acrobatic stunt.

Animal Handling

Wisdom

Calm or train an animal, or get an animal to behave in a certain way.

Arcana

Intelligence

Recall lore about spells, magic items, and the planes of existence.

Athletics

Strength

Jump farther than normal, stay afloat in rough water, or break something.

Deception

Charisma

Tell a convincing lie, or wear a disguise convincingly.

History

Intelligence

Recall lore about historical events, people, nations, and cultures.

Insight

Wisdom

Discern a person’s mood and intentions.

Intimidation

Charisma

Awe or threaten someone into doing what you want.

Investigation

Intelligence

Find obscure information in books, or deduce how something works.

Medicine

Wisdom

Diagnose an illness, or determine what killed the recently slain.

Nature

Intelligence

Recall lore about terrain, plants, animals, and weather.

Perception

Wisdom

Using a combination of senses, notice something that’s easy to miss.

Performance

Charisma

Act, tell a story, perform music, or dance.

Persuasion

Charisma

Honestly and graciously convince someone of something.

Religion

Intelligence

Recall lore about gods, religious rituals, and holy symbols.

Sleight of Hand

Dexterity

Pick a pocket, conceal a handheld object, or perform legerdemain.

Stealth

Dexterity

Escape notice by moving quietly and hiding behind things.

Survival

Wisdom

Follow tracks, forage, find a trail, or avoid natural hazards.

that skill but doesn’t add its Proficiency Bonus. For
example, if a character tries to climb a cliff, the GM
might ask for a Strength (Athletics) check. If the
character has Athletics proficiency, the character
adds their Proficiency Bonus to the Strength check.
If the character lacks that proficiency, they make
the check without adding their Proficiency Bonus.

Skill List

The skills are shown on the Skills table, which notes
example uses for each skill proficiency as well as
the ability check the skill most often applies to.

Determining Skills

A character’s starting skill proficiencies are determined at character creation, and a monster’s skill
proficiencies appear in its stat block.

Saving Throw Proficiencies

Proficiency in a saving throw lets a character add
their Proficiency Bonus to saves that use a particular ability. For example, proficiency in Wisdom
saves lets you add your Proficiency Bonus to your
Wisdom saves. Some monsters also have saving
throw proficiencies, as noted in their stat blocks.
Each class gives proficiency in at least two saving
throws, representing that class’s training in evading
or resisting certain threats. Wizards, for example,
are proficient in Intelligence and Wisdom saves;
they train to resist mental assault.

9

System Reference Document 5.2.1

Equipment Proficiencies
A character gains proficiency with various weapons
and tools from their class and background. There
are two categories of equipment proficiency:

Weapons. Anyone can wield a weapon, but proficiency makes you better at wielding it. If you have
proficiency with a weapon, you add your Proficiency Bonus to attack rolls you make with it.
Tools. If you have proficiency with a tool, you can
add your Proficiency Bonus to any ability check
you make that uses the tool. If you have proficiency in the skill that’s also used with that check,
you have Advantage on the check too. This means
you can benefit from both skill proficiency and
tool proficiency on the same ability check.

Actions

When you do something other than moving or communicating, you typically take an action. The Action
table lists the game’s main actions, which are defined in more detail in “Rules Glossary.”

Actions
Action

Summary

Attack

Attack with a weapon or an Unarmed
Strike.

Dash

For the rest of the turn, give yourself extra
movement equal to your Speed.

Action

Summary

Disengage

Your movement doesn’t provoke Opportunity Attacks for the rest of the turn.

Dodge

Until the start of your next turn, attack
rolls against you have Disadvantage, and
you make Dexterity saving throws with
Advantage. You lose this benefit if you
have the Incapacitated condition or if your
Speed is 0.

Help

Help another creature’s ability check or
attack roll, or administer first aid.

Hide

Make a Dexterity (Stealth) check.

Influence

Make a Charisma (Deception, Intimidation,
Performance, or Persuasion) or Wisdom
(Animal Handling) check to alter a creature’s attitude.

Magic

Cast a spell, use a magic item, or use a
magical feature.

Ready

Prepare to take an action in response to a
trigger you define.

Search

Make a Wisdom (Insight, Medicine,
Perception, or Survival) check.

Study

Make an Intelligence (Arcana, History, Investigation, Nature, or Religion) check.

Utilize

Use a nonmagical object.

Player characters and monsters can also do things
not covered by these actions. Many class features
and other abilities provide additional action options, and you can improvise other actions. When
you describe an action not detailed elsewhere in the
rules, the Game Master tells you whether that action
is possible and what kind of D20 Test you need to
make, if any.

One Thing at a Time

The game uses actions to govern how much you can
do at one time. You can take only one action at a
time. This principle is most important in combat, as
explained in “Combat” later in “Playing the Game.”
Actions can come up in other situations, too: in a
social interaction, you can try to Influence a creature or use the Search action to read the creature’s
body language, but you can’t do both at the same
time. And when you’re exploring a dungeon, you
can’t simultaneously use the Search action to look
for traps and use the Help action to aid another
character who’s trying to open a stuck door (with
the Utilize action).

Bonus Actions

10

Various class features, spells, and other abilities let
you take an additional action on your turn called
a Bonus Action. The Cunning Action feature, for

System Reference Document 5.2.1

example, allows a Rogue to take a Bonus Action. You
can take a Bonus Action only when a special ability,
a spell, or another feature of the game states that
you can do something as a Bonus Action. You otherwise don’t have a Bonus Action to take.
You can take only one Bonus Action on your turn,
so you must choose which Bonus Action to use if you
have more than one available.
You choose when to take a Bonus Action during
your turn unless the Bonus Action’s timing is specified. Anything that deprives you of your ability to
take actions also prevents you from taking a Bonus
Action.

Reactions

Certain special abilities, spells, and situations allow you to take a special action called a Reaction. A
Reaction is an instant response to a trigger of some
kind, which can occur on your turn or on someone
else’s. The Opportunity Attack, described later in
“Playing the Game,” is the most common type of
Reaction.
When you take a Reaction, you can’t take another
one until the start of your next turn. If the reaction
interrupts another creature’s turn, that creature
can continue its turn right after the Reaction.
In terms of timing, a Reaction takes place immediately after its trigger unless the Reaction’s description says otherwise.

Social Interaction

During their adventures, player characters meet
many different people and face some monsters that
would rather talk than fight. In those situations, it’s
time for social interaction, which takes many forms.
For example, you might try to convince a burglar to
confess to wrongdoing or try to flatter a guard. The
Game Master assumes the roles of any nonplayer
characters who are participating.
An NPC’s attitude toward your character is
Friendly, Indifferent, or Hostile, as defined in “Rules
Glossary.” Friendly NPCs are predisposed to help,
and Hostile ones are inclined to hinder.
Social interactions progress in two ways: through
roleplaying and ability checks.

Roleplaying

Roleplaying is, literally, the act of playing out a role.
In this case, it’s you as a player determining how
your character thinks, acts, and talks. Roleplaying is
part of every aspect of the game, and it comes to the
fore during social interactions.
As you roleplay, consider whether you prefer an
active approach or a descriptive approach.
The GM uses an NPC’s personality and your character’s actions and attitudes to determine how an

NPC reacts. A cowardly bandit might buckle under
threats of imprisonment. A stubborn merchant
refuses to help if the characters badger her. A vain
dragon laps up flattery.
When interacting with an NPC, pay attention to
the GM’s portrayal of the NPC’s personality. You
might be able to learn an NPC’s goals and then use
that information to influence the NPC.
If you offer NPCs something they want or play
on their sympathies, fears, or goals, you can form
friendships, ward off violence, or learn a key piece
of information. On the other hand, if you insult a
proud warrior or speak ill of a noble’s allies, your
efforts to convince or deceive will likely fail.

Ability Checks

Ability checks can be key in determining the outcome of a social interaction. Your roleplaying efforts
can alter an NPC’s attitude, but there might still be
an element of chance if the GM wants dice to play
a role in determining an NPC’s response to you. In
such situations, the GM will typically ask you to
take the Influence action.
Pay attention to your skill proficiencies when
thinking of how you will interact with an NPC; use
an approach that relies on your group’s skill proficiencies. For example, if the group needs to trick
a guard into letting them into a castle, the Rogue
who is proficient in Deception should lead the
discussion.

Exploration

Exploration involves delving into places that are
dangerous and full of mystery. The rules in this section detail some of the ways adventurers interact
with the environment in such places.

Adventuring Equipment

As adventurers explore, their equipment can help
them in many ways. For example, they can reach
out-of-the-way places with a Ladder, perceive things
they wouldn’t otherwise notice with a Torch or
another light source, bypass locked doors and containers with Thieves’ Tools, and create obstacles for
pursuers with Caltrops.
See “Equipment” for rules on many items that are
useful on adventures. The items in the“Tools” and
“Adventuring Gear” sections are especially useful.
The weapons in “Equipment” can also be used for
more than battle; you could use a Quarterstaff,
for example, to push a sinister-looking button that
you’re reluctant to touch.

11

System Reference Document 5.2.1

Vision and Light
Some adventuring tasks—such as noticing danger,
hitting an enemy, and targeting certain spells—are
affected by sight, so effects that obscure vision can
hinder you, as explained below.

Obscured Areas

An area might be Lightly or Heavily Obscured. In a
Lightly Obscured area—such as an area with Dim
Light, patchy fog, or moderate foliage—you have
Disadvantage on Wisdom (Perception) checks that
rely on sight.
A Heavily Obscured area—such as an area with
Darkness, heavy fog, or dense foliage—is opaque.
You have the Blinded condition (see “Rules Glossary”) when trying to see something there.

Light

The presence or absence of light determines the category of illumination in an area, as defined below.
Bright Light. Bright Light lets most creatures see
normally. Even gloomy days provide Bright Light, as
do torches, lanterns, fires, and other sources of illumination within a specific radius.
Dim Light. Dim Light, also called shadows, creates a Lightly Obscured area. An area of Dim Light
is usually a boundary between Bright Light and
surrounding Darkness. The soft light of twilight and
dawn also counts as Dim Light. A full moon might
bathe the land in Dim Light.
Darkness. Darkness creates a Heavily Obscured
area. Characters face Darkness outdoors at night
(even most moonlit nights), within the confines of
an unlit dungeon, or in an area of magical Darkness.

Special Senses

Some creatures have special senses that help them
perceive things in certain situations. “Rules Glossary” defines the following special senses:
Blindsight
Darkvision
Tremorsense
Truesight

Hiding
Adventurers and monsters often hide, whether to
spy on one another, sneak past a guardian, or set an
ambush. The Game Master decides when circumstances are appropriate for hiding. When you try to
hide, you take the Hide action.

Interacting with Objects

Interacting with objects is often simple to resolve.
The player tells the GM that their character is doing something, such as moving a lever or opening

a door, and the GM describes what happens. Sometimes, however, rules govern what you can do with
an object, as detailed in the following sections.

What Is an Object?

For the purpose of the rules, an object is a discrete,
inanimate item like a window, door, sword, book,
table, chair, or stone. It isn’t a building or a vehicle,
which are composed of many objects.

Time-Limited Object Interactions

When time is short, such as in combat, interactions
with objects are limited: one free interaction per
turn. That interaction must occur during a creature’s movement or action. Any additional interactions require the Utilize action, as explained in
“Combat” later in “Playing the Game.”

Finding Hidden Objects

When your character searches for hidden things,
such as a secret door or a trap, the GM typically asks
you to make a Wisdom (Perception) check, provided
you describe the character searching in the hidden
object’s vicinity. On a success, you find the object,
other important details, or both.
If you describe your character searching nowhere
near a hidden object, a Wisdom (Perception) check
won’t reveal the object, no matter the check’s total.

Carrying Objects

You can usually carry your gear and treasure without worrying about the weight of those objects. If
you try to haul an unusually heavy object or a massive number of lighter objects, the GM might require
you to abide by the rules for carrying capacity in
“Rules Glossary.”

Breaking Objects

As an action, you can automatically break or otherwise destroy a fragile, nonmagical object, such
as a glass container or a piece of paper. If you try to
damage something more resilient, the GM might use
the rules on breaking objects in “Rules Glossary.”

Marching Order

The adventurers should establish a marching order
while they travel, whether indoors or outdoors. A
marching order makes it easier to determine which
characters are affected by traps, which ones can spot
hidden enemies, and which ones are the closest to
those enemies if a fight breaks out. You can change
your marching order outside combat and record the
order any way you like: write it down, for example,
or arrange miniatures to show it.

12

System Reference Document 5.2.1

Hazards
Monsters are the main perils characters face, but
other dangers await. “Rules Glossary” defines the
following hazards:
Burning
Dehydration

Falling
Malnutrition

Suffocation

Travel
During an adventure, the characters might travel
long distances on trips that could take hours or
days. The GM can summarize this travel without
calculating exact distances or travel times, or the
GM might have you use the travel pace rules below.
If you need to know how fast you can move when
every second matters, see the movement rules in
“Combat” later in “Playing the Game.”

Travel Pace

While traveling outside combat, a group can move
at a Fast, Normal, or Slow pace, as shown on the
Travel Pace table. The table states how far the
party can move in a period of time; if riding horses
or other mounts, the group can move twice that
distance for 1 hour, after which the mounts need a
Short or Long Rest before they can move at that increased pace again (see “Equipment” for a selection
of mounts for sale). “Gameplay Toolbox” has rules
that affect which pace you can choose in certain
types of terrain.

Travel Pace

Distance Traveled Per …
Pace

Minute

Hour

Day

Fast

400 feet

4 miles

30 miles

Normal

300 feet

3 miles

24 miles

Slow

200 feet

2 miles

18 miles

Each travel pace has a game effect, as defined below.
Fast. Traveling at a Fast pace imposes Disadvantage on a traveler’s Wisdom (Perception or Survival) and Dexterity (Stealth) checks.
Normal. Traveling at a Normal pace imposes Disadvantage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks.
Slow. Traveling at a Slow pace grants Advantage
on Wisdom (Perception or Survival) checks.

Vehicles

Travelers in wagons, carriages, or other land vehicles choose a pace as normal. Characters in a waterborne vessel are limited to the speed of the vessel,
and they don’t choose a travel pace. Depending on
the vessel and the size of the crew, ships might be
able to travel for up to 24 hours per day. “Equipment” includes vehicles for sale.

Combat
Adventurers encounter many dangerous monsters
and nefarious villains. In those moments, combat
often breaks out.

The Order of Combat

A typical combat encounter is a clash between two
sides: a flurry of weapon swings, feints, parries,
footwork, and spellcasting. The game organizes
combat into a cycle of rounds and turns. A round
represents about 6 seconds in the game world.
During a round, each participant in a battle takes a
turn. The order of turns is determined at the beginning of combat when everyone rolls Initiative. Once
everyone has taken a turn, the fight continues to the
next round if neither side is defeated.

Combat Step by Step

Combat unfolds in these steps:

1: Establish Positions. The Game Master determines where all the characters and monsters are
located. Given the adventurers’ marching order
or their stated positions in the room or other location, the GM figures out where the adversaries
are—how far away and in what direction.
2: Roll Initiative. Everyone involved in the combat
encounter rolls Initiative, determining the order
of combatants’ turns.
3: Take Turns. Each participant in the battle takes
a turn in Initiative order. When everyone involved in the combat has had a turn, the round
ends. Repeat this step until the fighting stops.

Initiative

Initiative determines the order of turns during
combat. When combat starts, every participant
rolls Initiative; they make a Dexterity check that
determines their place in the Initiative order. The
GM rolls for monsters. For a group of identical creatures, the GM makes a single roll, so each member of
the group has the same Initiative.
Surprise. If a combatant is surprised by combat
starting, that combatant has Disadvantage on their
Initiative roll. For example, if an ambusher starts
combat while hidden from a foe who is unaware
that combat is starting, that foe is surprised.
Initiative Order. A combatant’s check total is
called their Initiative count, or Initiative for short.
The GM ranks the combatants, from highest to
lowest Initiative. This is the order in which they act
during each round. The Initiative order remains the
same from round to round.
Ties. If a tie occurs, the GM decides the order
among tied monsters, and the players decide the
order among tied characters. The GM decides the

13

System Reference Document 5.2.1

order if the tie is between a monster and a player
character.

Your Turn

On your turn, you can move a distance up to your
Speed and take one action. You decide whether to
move first or take your action first.
The main actions you can take are listed in “Actions” earlier in “Playing the Game.” A character’s
features and a monster’s stat block also provide
action options. “Movement and Position” later in
“Playing the Game” gives the rules for movement.
Communicating. You can communicate however
you are able—through brief utterances and gestures—as you take your turn. Doing so uses neither
your action nor your move.
Extended communication, such as a detailed explanation of something or an attempt to persuade a
foe, requires an action. The Influence action is the
main way you try to influence a monster.
Interacting with Things. You can interact with
one object or feature of the environment for free,
during either your move or action. For example, you
could open a door during your move as you stride
toward a foe.
If you want to interact with a second object, you
need to take the Utilize action. Some magic items
and other special objects always require an action
to use, as stated in their descriptions.

Playing on a Grid

If you play using a square grid and miniatures or
other tokens, follow these rules.
Squares. Each square represents 5 feet.
Speed. Rather than moving foot by foot, move
square by square on the grid, using your Speed in
5-foot segments. You can translate your Speed into
squares by dividing it by 5. For example, a Speed of
30 feet translates into 6 squares. If you use a grid often, consider writing your Speed in squares on your
character sheet.
Entering a Square. To enter a square, you must
have enough movement left to pay for entering. It
costs 1 square of movement to enter an unoccupied
square that’s adjacent to your space (orthogonally
or diagonally adjacent). A square of Difficult Terrain
costs 2 squares to enter. Other effects might make a
square cost even more.
Corners. Diagonal movement can’t cross the corner of a wall, a large tree, or another terrain feature
that fills its space.
Ranges. To determine the range on a grid between two things—whether creatures or objects—
count squares from a square adjacent to one of them
and stop counting in the space of the other one.
Count by the shortest route.

The GM might require you to use an action for
any of these activities when it needs special care or
when it presents an unusual obstacle. For instance,
the GM might require you to take the Utilize action
to open a stuck door or turn a crank to lower a
drawbridge.
Doing Nothing on Your Turn. You can forgo moving, taking an action, or doing anything at all on
your turn. If you can’t decide what to do, consider
taking the defensive Dodge action or the Ready action to delay acting.

Ending Combat

Combat ends when one side or the other is defeated,
which can mean the creatures are killed or knocked
out or have surrendered or fled. Combat can also
end when both sides agree to end it.

Movement and Position

On your turn, you can move a distance equal to your
Speed or less. Or you can decide not to move.
Your movement can include climbing, crawling,
jumping, and swimming (each explained in “Rules
Glossary”). These different modes of movement can
be combined with your regular movement, or they
can constitute your entire move.
However you’re moving with your Speed, you
deduct the distance of each part of your move from
it until it is used up or until you are done moving,
whichever comes first.
A character’s Speed is determined during character creation. A monster’s Speed is noted in the
monster’s stat block. See “Rules Glossary” for more
about Speed as well as about special speeds, such as
a Climb Speed, Fly Speed, or Swim Speed.

Difficult Terrain

Combatants are often slowed down by Difficult
Terrain. Low furniture, rubble, undergrowth, steep
stairs, snow, and shallow bogs are examples of Difficult Terrain.
Every foot of movement in Difficult Terrain costs
1 extra foot, even if multiple things in a space count
as Difficult Terrain.

Breaking Up Your Move

You can break up your move, using some of its
movement before and after any action, Bonus Action, or Reaction you take on the same turn. For
example, if you have a Speed of 30 feet, you could go
10 feet, take an action, and then go 20 feet.

Dropping Prone

On your turn, you can give yourself the Prone condition (see “Rules Glossary”) without using an action
or any of your Speed, but you can’t do so if your
Speed is 0.

14

System Reference Document 5.2.1

Creature Size
A creature belongs to a size category, which determines the width of the square space the creature
occupies on a map, as shown on the Creature Size
and Space table. That table lists the sizes from
smallest (Tiny) to largest (Gargantuan). A creature’s
space is the area that it effectively controls in combat and the area it needs to fight effectively.
A character’s size is determined by species, and
a monster’s size is specified in the monster’s stat
block.

Creature Size and Space
Size

Space (Feet)

Space (Squares)

Tiny

2½ by 2½ feet

4 per square

Small

5 by 5 feet

1 square

Medium

5 by 5 feet

1 square

Large

10 by 10 feet

4 squares (2 by 2)

Huge

15 by 15 feet

9 squares (3 by 3)

Gargantuan

20 by 20 feet

16 squares (4 by 4)

Moving around Other Creatures
During your move, you can pass through the space
of an ally, a creature that has the Incapacitated
condition (see “Rules Glossary”), a Tiny creature, or
a creature that is two sizes larger or smaller than
you.
Another creature’s space is Difficult Terrain for
you unless that creature is Tiny or your ally.
You can’t willingly end a move in a space occupied
by another creature. If you somehow end a turn in
a space with another creature, you have the Prone
condition (see “Rules Glossary”) unless you are Tiny
or are of a larger size than the other creature.

Making an Attack

When you take the Attack action, you make an
attack. Some other actions, Bonus Actions, and Reactions also let you make an attack. Whether you
strike with a Melee weapon, fire a Ranged weapon,

Unseen Attackers and Targets

When you make an attack roll against a target you
can’t see, you have Disadvantage on the roll. This is
true whether you’re guessing the target’s location or
targeting a creature you can hear but not see. If the
target isn’t in the location you targeted, you miss.
When a creature can’t see you, you have Advantage
on attack rolls against it.
If you are hidden when you make an attack roll,
you give away your location when the attack hits or
misses.

or make an attack roll as part of a spell, an attack
has the following structure:

1: Choose a Target. Pick a target within your attack’s range: a creature, an object, or a location.
2: Determine Modifiers. The GM determines
whether the target has Cover (see the next section) and whether you have Advantage or Disadvantage against the target. In addition, spells,
special abilities, and other effects can apply penalties or bonuses to your attack roll.
3: Resolve the Attack. Make the attack roll, as
detailed earlier in “Playing the Game.” On a hit,
you roll damage unless the particular attack
has rules that specify otherwise. Some attacks
cause special effects in addition to or instead of
damage.

Cover

Walls, trees, creatures, and other obstacles can provide cover, making a target more difficult to harm.
As detailed in the Cover table, there are three degrees of cover, each of which gives a different benefit to a target.
A target can benefit from cover only when an attack or other effect originates on the opposite side
of the cover. If a target is behind multiple sources
of cover, only the most protective degree of cover
applies; the degrees aren’t added together. For example, if a target is behind a creature that gives Half
Cover and a tree trunk that gives Three-Quarters
Cover, the target has Three-Quarters Cover.

Cover

Degree

Benefit to Target Offered By …

Half

+2 bonus to AC
and Dexterity
saving throws

Another creature or
an object that covers at
least half of the target

Three+5 bonus to AC
Quarters and Dexterity
saving throws

An object that covers at
least three-quarters of
the target

Total

An object that covers
the whole target

Can’t be targeted
directly

Ranged Attacks
When you make a ranged attack, you fire a bow,
hurl an axe, or otherwise send projectiles to strike a
foe at a distance. Many spells also involve making a
ranged attack.

Range

You can make ranged attacks only against targets
within a specified range. If a ranged attack, such as
one made with a spell, has a single range, you can’t
attack a target beyond this range.

15

System Reference Document 5.2.1

Some ranged attacks, such as those made with a
Longbow, have two ranges. The smaller number is
the normal range, and the larger number is the long
range. Your attack roll has Disadvantage when your
target is beyond normal range, and you can’t attack
a target beyond long range.

Ranged Attacks in Close Combat

Aiming a ranged attack is more difficult when a foe
is next to you. When you make a ranged attack roll
with a weapon, a spell, or some other means, you
have Disadvantage on the roll if you are within 5
feet of an enemy who can see you and doesn’t have
the Incapacitated condition (see “Rules Glossary”).

Melee Attacks

A melee attack allows you to attack a target within
your reach. A melee attack typically uses a handheld weapon or an Unarmed Strike. Many monsters
make melee attacks with claws, teeth, or other body
parts. A few spells also involve melee attacks.

Reach

A creature has a 5-foot reach and can thus attack
targets within 5 feet when making a melee attack.
Certain creatures have melee attacks with a reach
greater than 5 feet, as noted in their descriptions.

Opportunity Attacks

Combatants watch for enemies to drop their guard.
If you move heedlessly past your foes, you put yourself in danger by provoking an Opportunity Attack.
Avoiding Opportunity Attacks. You can avoid
provoking an Opportunity Attack by taking the
Disengage action. You also don’t provoke an Opportunity Attack when you Teleport or when you are
moved without using your movement, action, Bonus
Action, or Reaction. For example, you don’t provoke
an Opportunity Attack if an explosion hurls you out
of a foe’s reach or if you fall past an enemy.
Making an Opportunity Attack. You can make an
Opportunity Attack when a creature that you can
see leaves your reach. To make the attack, take a Reaction to make one melee attack with a weapon or
an Unarmed Strike against that creature. The attack
occurs right before it leaves your reach.

Mounted Combat

A willing creature that is at least one size larger
than a rider and that has an appropriate anatomy
can serve as a mount, using the following rules.

Mounting and Dismounting

During your move, you can mount a creature that
is within 5 feet of you or dismount. Doing so costs
an amount of movement equal to half your Speed
(round down). For example, if your Speed is 30 feet,
you spend 15 feet of movement to mount a horse.

Controlling a Mount
You can control a mount only if it has been trained
to accept a rider. Domesticated horses, mules, and
similar creatures have such training.
The Initiative of a controlled mount changes to
match yours when you mount it. It moves on your
turn as you direct it, and it has only three action options during that turn: Dash, Disengage, and Dodge.
A controlled mount can move and act even on the
turn that you mount it.
In contrast, an independent mount—one that lets
you ride but ignores your control—retains its place
in the Initiative order and moves and acts as it likes.

Falling Off

If an effect is about to move your mount against its
will while you’re on it, you must succeed on a DC 10
Dexterity saving throw or fall off, landing with the
Prone condition (see “Rules Glossary”) in an unoccupied space within 5 feet of the mount.
While mounted, you must make the same save if
you’re knocked Prone or the mount is.

Underwater Combat

A fight underwater follows these rules.

Impeded Weapons

When making a melee attack roll with a weapon
underwater, a creature that lacks a Swim Speed has
Disadvantage on the attack roll unless the weapon
deals Piercing damage.
A ranged attack roll with a weapon underwater
automatically misses a target beyond the weapon’s
normal range, and the attack roll has Disadvantage
against a target within normal range.

Fire Resistance

Anything underwater has Resistance to Fire damage (explained in “Damage and Healing”).

Damage and Healing

Injury and death are frequent threats, as detailed in
the following rules.

Hit Points

Hit Points represent durability and the will to live.
Creatures with more Hit Points are more difficult
to kill. Your Hit Point maximum is the number of

Resting

Adventurers can’t spend every hour adventuring.
They need rest. Any creature can take hour-long
Short Rests in the midst of a day and an 8-hour Long
Rest to end it. Regaining Hit Points is one of the main
benefits of a rest. “Rules Glossary” provides the
rules for Short and Long Rests.

16

System Reference Document 5.2.1

Hit Points you have when uninjured. Your current
Hit Points can be any number from that maximum
down to 0, which is the lowest Hit Points can go.
Whenever you take damage, subtract it from your
Hit Points. Hit Point loss has no effect on your capabilities until you reach 0 Hit Points.
If you have half your Hit Points or fewer, you’re
Bloodied, which has no game effect on its own but
which might trigger other game effects.

Damage Rolls

Each weapon, spell, and damaging monster ability
specifies the damage it deals. You roll the damage
dice, add any modifiers, and deal the damage to
your target. If there’s a penalty to the damage, it’s
possible to deal 0 damage but not negative damage.
When attacking with a weapon, you add your ability modifier—the same modifier used for the attack
roll—to the damage roll. A spell tells you which dice
to roll for damage and whether to add any modifiers. Unless a rule says otherwise, you don’t add
your ability modifier to a fixed damage amount that
doesn’t use a roll, such as the damage of a Blowgun.
See “Equipment” for weapons’ damage dice and
“Spells” for spells’ damage dice.

Critical Hits

When you score a Critical Hit, you deal extra damage. Roll the attack’s damage dice twice, add them
together, and add any relevant modifiers as normal.
For example, if you score a Critical Hit with a Dagger, roll 2d4 for the damage rather than 1d4, and
add your relevant ability modifier. If the attack involves other damage dice, such as from the Rogue’s
Sneak Attack feature, you also roll those dice twice.

Saving Throws and Damage

Damage dealt via saving throws uses these rules.

Damage against Multiple Targets

When you create a damaging effect that forces two
or more targets to make saving throws against it at
the same time, roll the damage once for all the targets. For example, when a wizard casts Fireball, the
spell’s damage is rolled once for all creatures caught
in the blast.

Half Damage

Many saving throw effects deal half damage (round
down) to a target when the target succeeds on the
saving throw. The halved damage is equal to half
the damage that would be dealt on a failed save.

Damage Types

Each instance of damage has a type, like Fire
or Slashing. Damage types are listed in “Rules

Glossary” and have no rules of their own, but other
rules, such as Resistance, rely on damage types.

Resistance and Vulnerability

Some creatures and objects have Resistance or
Vulnerability to certain damage types. If you have
Resistance to a damage type, damage of that type
is halved against you (round down). If you have
Vulnerability to a damage type, damage of that type
is doubled against you. For example, if you have
Resistance to Cold damage, such damage is halved
against you, and if you have Vulnerability to Fire
damage, such damage is doubled against you.

No Stacking

Multiple instances of Resistance or Vulnerability
that affect the same damage type count as only one
instance. For example, if you have Resistance to Necrotic damage as well as Resistance to all damage,
Necrotic damage is reduced by half against you.

Order of Application

Modifiers to damage are applied in the following
order: adjustments such as bonuses, penalties, or
multipliers are applied first; Resistance is applied
second; and Vulnerability is applied third.
For example, a creature has Resistance to all damage and Vulnerability to Fire damage, and it’s within
a magical aura that reduces all damage by 5. If it
takes 28 Fire damage, the damage is first reduced
by 5 (to 23), then halved for the creature’s Resistance (and rounded down to 11), then doubled for
its Vulnerability (to 22).

Immunity

Some creatures and objects have Immunity to certain damage types and conditions. Immunity to a
damage type means you don’t take damage of that
type, and Immunity to a condition means you aren’t
affected by it.

Healing

Hit Points can be restored by magic, such as the
Cure Wounds spell or a Potion of Healing, or by a
Short or Long Rest (see “Rules Glossary”).

Knocking Out a Creature

When you would reduce a creature to 0 Hit Points
with a melee attack, you can instead reduce the creature to 1 Hit Point and give it the Unconscious condition. It then starts a Short Rest, at the end of which
that condition ends on it. The condition ends early
if the creature regains any Hit Points or if someone
takes an action to administer first aid to it, making a
successful DC 10 Wisdom (Medicine) check.

17

System Reference Document 5.2.1

When you receive healing, add the restored Hit
Points to your current Hit Points. Your Hit Points
can’t exceed your Hit Point maximum, so any Hit
Points regained in excess of the maximum are lost.
For example, if you receive 8 Hit Points of healing
and have 14 Hit Points and a Hit Point maximum of
20, you regain 6 Hit Points, not 8.

Dropping to 0 Hit Points

When a creature drops to 0 Hit Points, it either dies
outright or falls unconscious, as explained below.

Instant Death

Here are the main ways a creature can die instantly.
Monster Death. A monster dies the instant it
drops to 0 Hit Points, although a Game Master can
ignore this rule for an individual monster and treat
it like a character.
Hit Point Maximum of 0. A creature dies if its Hit
Point maximum reaches 0. Certain effects drain life
energy, reducing a creature’s Hit Point maximum.
Massive Damage. When damage reduces a character to 0 Hit Points and damage remains, the character dies if the remainder equals or exceeds their
Hit Point maximum. For example, if your character
has a Hit Point maximum of 12, currently has 6 Hit
Points, and takes 18 damage, the character drops to
0 Hit Points, but 12 damage remains. The character
then dies, since 12 equals their Hit Point maximum.

Character Demise

If your character dies, others might find a magical
way to revive your character, such as with the Raise
Dead spell. Or talk with the GM about making a new
character to join the group. “Rules Glossary” has
more information on being dead.

Falling Unconscious

If you reach 0 Hit Points and don’t die instantly, you
have the Unconscious condition (see “Rules Glossary”) until you regain any Hit Points, and you now
face making Death Saving Throws (see below).

Death Saving Throws

Whenever you start your turn with 0 Hit Points,
you must make a Death Saving Throw to determine
whether you creep closer to death or hang on to life.
Unlike other saving throws, this one isn’t tied to an
ability score. You’re in the hands of fate now.
Three Successes/Failures. Roll 1d20. If the roll
is 10 or higher, you succeed. Otherwise, you fail. A
success or failure has no effect by itself. On your
third success, you become Stable (see “Stabilizing a
Character” below). On your third failure, you die.
The successes and failures don’t need to be consecutive; keep track of both until you collect three
of a kind. The number of both is reset to zero when
you regain any Hit Points or become Stable.

Rolling a 1 or 20. When you roll a 1 on the d20
for a Death Saving Throw, you suffer two failures. If
you roll a 20 on the d20, you regain 1 Hit Point.
Damage at 0 Hit Points. If you take any damage
while you have 0 Hit Points, you suffer a Death Saving Throw failure. If the damage is from a Critical
Hit, you suffer two failures instead. If the damage
equals or exceeds your Hit Point maximum, you die.

Stabilizing a Character

You can take the Help action to try to stabilize a
creature with 0 Hit Points, which requires a successful DC 10 Wisdom (Medicine) check.
A Stable creature doesn’t make Death Saving
Throws even though it has 0 Hit Points, but it still
has the Unconscious condition. If the creature takes
damage, it stops being Stable and starts making
Death Saving Throws again. A Stable creature that
isn’t healed regains 1 Hit Point after 1d4 hours.

Temporary Hit Points

Some spells and other effects confer Temporary Hit
Points, which are a buffer against losing actual Hit
Points, as explained below.

Lose Temporary Hit Points First

If you have Temporary Hit Points and take damage,
those points are lost first, and any leftover damage
carries over to your Hit Points. For example, if you
have 5 Temporary Hit Points and take 7 damage,
you lose those points and then lose 2 Hit Points.

18

System Reference Document 5.2.1

Duration
Temporary Hit Points last until they’re depleted or
you finish a Long Rest (see “Rules Glossary”).

They Don’t Stack

Temporary Hit Points can’t be added together. If
you have Temporary Hit Points and receive more
of them, you decide whether to keep the ones you
have or to gain the new ones. For example, if a spell
grants you 12 Temporary Hit Points when you already have 10, you can have 12 or 10, not 22.

They’re Not Hit Points or Healing

Temporary Hit Points can’t be added to your Hit
Points, healing can’t restore them, and receiving
Temporary Hit Points doesn’t count as healing. Because Temporary Hit Points aren’t Hit Points, a creature can be at full Hit Points and receive Temporary
Hit Points.
If you have 0 Hit Points, receiving Temporary Hit
Points doesn’t restore you to consciousness. Only
true healing can save you.

Character
Creation
Choose a Character Sheet

Warlock

Occult lore

Charisma

High

Wizard

Spellbooks

Intelligence

Average

You’ll record the main details of your character on
a character sheet. Throughout this chapter, we use
the term “character sheet” to mean whatever you
use to track your character’s details, whether it’s a
printed character sheet, a digital character sheet, or
plain paper. Choose whichever style of sheet works
for you, and then embark on creating a character!

Create Your Character

Here are the steps to make a character; each step is
explored in detail:

1: Choose a Class. Every adventurer is a member
of a class. A class broadly describes a character’s
vocation, special talents, and favored tactics.
2: Determine Origin. A character’s origin includes
two elements: background and species. How did
the character spend the years leading up to a life
of adventure? Who are the character’s ancestors?
You can also choose your character’s languages.
3: Determine Ability Scores. Much of what your
character does in the game depends on the character’s six abilities.
4: Choose an Alignment. Alignment is a shorthand
for your character’s moral compass.
5: Fill in Details. Using the choices you’ve made, fill
in the remaining details on your character sheet.

Step 1: Choose Class

Choose a class, and write it on your character sheet.
The Class Overview table summarizes the classes.
See “Classes” for the classes’ details.

Class Overview
Class

19

Likes ...

Primary
Ability

Complexity

Barbarian Battle

Strength

Average

Bard

Performing

Charisma

High

Cleric

Gods

Wisdom

Average

Druid

Nature

Wisdom

High

Fighter

Weapons

Strength
or Dexterity

Low

Monk

Unarmed
combat

Dexterity
and Wisdom

High

Paladin

Defense

Strength
Average
and Charisma

Ranger

Survival

Dexterity
and Wisdom

System Reference Document 5.2.1

Average

Class

Likes ...

Primary
Ability

Complexity

Rogue

Stealth

Dexterity

Low

Sorcerer

Power

Charisma

High

Write Your Level
Write your character’s level on your character
sheet. Typically, a character starts at level 1 and
advances in level by adventuring and gaining Experience Points (XP).
Write Your XP. Also record your Experience
Points. A level 1 character has 0 XP.
Starting at a Higher Level. Your GM might start
you at a higher level. If you start at level 3 or higher,
write your chosen subclass on your character sheet.
See the “Starting at Higher Levels” section later in
“Character Creation” for more information.

Note Armor Training

Your class might give you training with certain
categories of armor. Note your armor training on
your character sheet. Armor training with a kind of
armor means you can wear that armor effectively,
gaining defensive bonuses from it. The categories of
armor are described in “Equipment.”

Step 2: Character Origin

Determining your character’s origin involves choosing a background, a species, and two languages.
A character’s background represents the place
and occupation that were most formative for the
character. The combination of background, species,
and languages provides fertile soil for your imagination as you ponder your character’s earliest days.

Choose a Background

Choose your character’s background, and write it on
your character sheet. You can choose any of the backgrounds detailed in “Character Origins,” and your GM
might offer additional backgrounds as options.
The background you choose influences step 3,
when you determine your character’s ability scores.
If you’re having trouble choosing, the Ability Scores
and Backgrounds table shows which backgrounds
benefit which ability scores. Look for your class’s
primary ability there.

Ability Scores and Backgrounds
Ability

Background

Strength

Soldier

Dexterity

Soldier

Constitution Soldier
Intelligence

Acolyte

Ability

Background

Wisdom

Acolyte

Charisma

Acolyte

Record Your Feat. A background gives you a feat,
which grants your character particular capabilities.
Feats are detailed in “Feats.” Write the feat on your
character sheet.
Note Proficiencies. Your background gives proficiency in two skills and with one tool. Record this
information on your character sheet.
Your class also gives proficiencies. Check your
class description in “Classes” and note the proficiencies on your character sheet.
The features table in your class description shows
your Proficiency Bonus (described in “Playing the
Game”), which is +2 for a level 1 character. Note this
number on your character sheet. You’ll fill in other
numbers connected to these proficiencies in step 5.

Your character knows at least three languages:
Common plus two languages you roll or choose
from the Standard Languages table. Knowledge of a
language means your character can communicate in
it, read it, and write it. Your class and other features
might also give you languages.
The Standard Languages table lists languages that
are widespread in the setting. Every player character knows Common. The other standard languages
originated with the first members of the most
prominent species in the setting and have since
spread widely.

Standard Languages
1d12

Language

—

Common

1

Common Sign Language

2

Draconic

Choose Starting Equipment

3–4

Dwarvish

Your background and class both provide starting
equipment. Any coins that you gain at this step
can be immediately spent on equipment from
“Equipment.”
Record your chosen equipment on your character
sheet. Equipment is described in “Equipment,” but
for now you can just write it all down and look up
the specifics in “Equipment” later. Note any coins
you have left after purchasing your equipment.

5–6

Elvish

7

Giant

8

Gnomish

9

Goblin

Choose a Species

Choose a species for your character. The following
species options are detailed in “Character Origins”:
Dragonborn, Dwarf, Elf, Gnome, Goliath, Halfling,
Human, Orc, and Tiefling. Once you’ve chosen a species, write it on your character sheet. Then record
your species’ traits.
Your character’s size and Speed are determined
by the character’s species; record these in the appropriate places on your character sheet as well
(you may write just the first letter of your size).

Imagine Your Past and Present

Let your character’s background and species inspire
how you imagine their past. That past fed into the
character’s present. With that in mind, consider answers to the following questions as your character:
•
•
•
•
•

Who raised you?
Who was your dearest childhood friend?
Did you grow up with a pet?
Have you fallen in love? If so, with whom?
Did you join an organization, such as a guild or religion? If so, are you still a member of it?
• What elements of your past inspire you to go on
adventures now?

20

Choose Languages

System Reference Document 5.2.1

10–11 Halfling
12

Orc

The Rare Languages table lists languages that are
either secret or derived from other planes of existence and thus less widespread in the worlds of the
Material Plane. Some features let a character learn a
rare language.

Rare Languages
Language

Language

Abyssal

Primordial*

Celestial

Sylvan

Deep Speech

Thieves’ Cant

Druidic

Undercommon

Infernal
*Primordial includes the Aquan, Auran, Ignan, and Terran dialects.
Creatures that know one of these dialects can communicate with
those that know a different one.

Step 3: Ability Scores
To determine your character’s ability scores, you
first generate a set of six numbers using the instructions below and then assign them to your six abilities. “Playing the Game” explains what each ability
means.

Generate Your Scores
Determine your ability scores by using one of the
following three methods. Your GM might prefer you
to use a particular one.
Standard Array. Use the following six scores for
your abilities: 15, 14, 13, 12, 10, 8.
Random Generation. Roll four d6s and record
the total of the highest three dice. Do this five more
times, so you have six numbers.
Point Cost. You have 27 points to spend on your
ability scores. The cost of each score is shown on
the Ability Score Point Costs table. For example, a
score of 14 costs 7 of your 27 points.

Ability Score Point Costs

Determine Ability Modifiers

Finally, determine your ability modifiers using the
Ability Scores and Modifiers table. Write the modifier next to each of your scores.

Ability Scores and Modifiers
Score

Modifier

Score

Modifier

3

−4

12–13

+1

4–5

−3

14–15

+2

6–7

−2

16–17

+3

8–9

−1

18–19

+4

10–11

+0

20

+5

Score

Cost

Score

Cost

8

0

12

4

9

1

13

5

10

2

14

7

Step 4: Alignment

11

3

15

9

Choose your character’s alignment from the options
below, and note it on your character sheet.
The game assumes that player characters aren’t of
an evil alignment. Check with your GM before making an evil character.

Assign Ability Scores
Once you’ve generated six scores, assign them to
Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma, keeping in mind your class’s
primary ability. Fill in the ability modifiers as well.
If you’re using the Standard Array option, consult
the Standard Array by Class table for suggestions
on where to assign scores for your character’s class.
The table puts the highest scores in a class’s main
abilities. If you used a different method to generate the scores, you may still use this table to guide
where you place your highest and lowest scores.

Standard Array by Class
Class

Str.

Dex. Con. Int.

Wis.

Cha.

Barbarian

15

13

14

10

12

8

Bard

8

14

12

13

10

15

Cleric

14

8

13

10

15

12

Druid

8

12

14

13

15

10

Fighter

15

14

13

8

10

12

Monk

12

15

13

10

14

8

Paladin

15

10

13

8

12

14

Ranger

12

15

13

8

14

10

Rogue

12

15

13

14

10

8

Sorcerer

10

13

14

8

12

15

Warlock

8

14

13

12

10

15

Wizard

8

12

13

15

14

10

Adjust Ability Scores

21

a different one by 1, or increase all three by 1. None
of these increases can raise a score above 20.
Some players like to increase their class’s primary
ability, while others prefer to increase a low score.

After assigning your ability scores, adjust them according to your background. Your background lists
three abilities; increase one of those scores by 2 and

System Reference Document 5.2.1

The Nine Alignments

A creature’s alignment broadly describes its ethical
attitudes and ideals. Alignment is a combination of
two factors: one identifies morality (good, evil, or
neutral), and the other describes attitudes toward
order (lawful, chaotic, or neutral).
The summaries of the alignments below describe
the typical behavior of a creature with that alignment; individuals can vary from that behavior.
Lawful Good (LG). Lawful Good creatures endeavor to do the right thing as expected by society.
Someone who fights injustice and protects the innocent without hesitation is probably Lawful Good.
Neutral Good (NG). Neutral Good creatures do the
best they can, working within rules but not feeling
bound by them. A kindly person who helps others
according to their needs is probably Neutral Good.
Chaotic Good (CG). Chaotic Good creatures act as
their conscience directs with little regard for what
others expect. A rebel who waylays a cruel baron’s
tax collectors and uses the stolen money to help the
poor is probably Chaotic Good.
Lawful Neutral (LN). Lawful Neutral individuals
act in accordance with law, tradition, or personal
codes. Someone who follows a disciplined rule of
life—and isn’t swayed either by the demands of
those in need or by the temptations of evil—is probably Lawful Neutral.
Neutral (N). Neutral is the alignment of those who
prefer to avoid moral questions and don’t take sides,

Unaligned Creatures
Most creatures that lack the capacity for rational
thought don’t have alignments; they are unaligned.
Sharks are savage predators, for example, but they
aren’t evil; they are unaligned.

doing what seems best at the time. Someone who’s
bored by moral debate is probably Neutral.
Chaotic Neutral (CN). Chaotic Neutral creatures
follow their whims, valuing their personal freedom
above all else. A scoundrel who wanders the land
living by their wits is probably Chaotic Neutral.
Lawful Evil (LE). Lawful Evil creatures methodically take what they want within the limits of a code
of tradition, loyalty, or order. An aristocrat exploiting citizens while scheming for power is probably
Lawful Evil.
Neutral Evil (NE). Neutral Evil is the alignment of
those who are untroubled by the harm they cause as
they pursue their desires. A criminal who robs and
murders as they please is probably Neutral Evil.
Chaotic Evil (CE). Chaotic Evil creatures act
with arbitrary violence, spurred by their hatred or
bloodlust. A villain pursuing schemes of vengeance
and havoc is probably Chaotic Evil.

Step 5: Character Creation Details
Now fill in the rest of your character sheet.

Record Class Features

Look at your class’s feature table in “Classes,” and
write down the level 1 features. The class features
are detailed there too.
Some class features offer choices. Make sure to
read all your features and make any offered choices.

Fill In Numbers

22

Note these numbers on your character sheet.
Saving Throws. For the saving throws you have
proficiency in, add your Proficiency Bonus to the appropriate ability modifier and note the total. Some
players also like to note the modifier for saving
throws they’re not proficient in, which is just the
relevant ability modifier.
Skills. For skills you have proficiency in, add your
Proficiency Bonus to the ability modifier associated
with that skill, and note the total. You might also
wish to note the modifier for skills you’re not proficient in, which is just the relevant ability modifier.
Passive Perception. Sometimes your GM will determine whether your character notices something
without asking you to make a Wisdom (Perception)
check; the GM uses your Passive Perception instead.
Passive Perception is a score that reflects a general
awareness of your surroundings when you’re not
actively looking for something. Use this formula to
determine your Passive Perception score:

System Reference Document 5.2.1

Passive Perception = 10 + Wisdom (Perception)
check modifier
Include all modifiers that apply to your Wisdom
(Perception) checks. For example, if your character
has a Wisdom of 15 and proficiency in the Perception skill, you have a Passive Perception of 14 (10 +
2 for your Wisdom modifier + 2 for proficiency).
Hit Points. Your class and Constitution modifier
determine your Hit Point maximum at level 1, as
shown on the Level 1 Hit Points by Class table.

Level 1 Hit Points by Class
Class

Hit Point Maximum

Barbarian

12 + Con. modifier

Fighter, Paladin, or Ranger

10 + Con. modifier

Bard, Cleric, Druid, Monk,
Rogue, or Warlock

8 + Con. modifier

Sorcerer or Wizard

6 + Con. modifier

The character sheet includes room to note your
current Hit Points when you take damage, as well as
any Temporary Hit Points you might gain. There’s
also space to track Death Saving Throws.
Hit Point Dice. Your class’s description tells you
the die type of your character’s Hit Point Dice (or
Hit Dice for short); write this on your character
sheet. At level 1, your character has 1 Hit Die. You
can spend Hit Dice during a Short Rest to recover
Hit Points. Your character sheet also includes space
to note how many Hit Dice you’ve spent.
Initiative. Write your Dexterity modifier in the
space for Initiative on your character sheet.
Armor Class. Without armor or a shield, your
base Armor Class is 10 plus your Dexterity modifier. If your starting equipment includes armor or a
Shield (or both), calculate your AC using the rules in
“Equipment.” A class feature might give you a different way to calculate your AC.
Attacks. In the Weapons & Damage Cantrips
section of the character sheet, write your starting
weapons. The attack roll bonus for a weapon with
which you have proficiency is one of the following
unless a weapon’s property says otherwise:
Melee attack bonus = Strength modifier
+ Proficiency Bonus
Ranged attack bonus = Dexterity modifier
+ Proficiency Bonus

Look up the damage and properties of your
weapons in “Equipment.” You add the same ability
modifier you use for attacks with a weapon to your
damage rolls with that weapon.
Spellcasting. Note both the saving throw DC for
your spells and the attack bonus for attacks you
make with them, using these formulas:

Spell save DC = 8 + spellcasting ability modifier
+ Proficiency Bonus
Spell attack bonus = spellcasting ability modifier
+ Proficiency Bonus
Your spellcasting ability modifier for a spell is determined by whatever feature gives you the ability
to cast the spell.
Spell Slots, Cantrips, and Prepared Spells. If
your class gives you the Spellcasting or Pact Magic
feature, your class features table shows the number
of spell slots you have available, how many cantrips
you know, and how many spells you can prepare.
Choose your cantrips and prepared spells, and note
them—along with your number of spell slots—on
your character sheet.

Level Advancement

While going on adventures, your character gains experience, represented by Experience Points (XP). A
character who reaches a specified Experience Point
total advances in capability. This advancement is
called gaining a level.
The Character Advancement table lists the XP
you need to advance to a level and the Proficiency
Bonus for a character of that level. When your XP
total equals or exceeds a number in the Experience
Points column, you reach the corresponding level.

Character Advancement
Level

23

Experience Points

Proficiency Bonus

1

0

+2

2

300

+2

3

900

+2

4

2,700

+2

5

6,500

+3

6

14,000

+3

7

23,000

+3

8

34,000

+3

9

48,000

+4

10

64,000

+4

11

85,000

+4

12

100,000

+4

13

120,000

+5

14

140,000

+5

15

165,000

+5

16

195,000

+5

17

225,000

+6

18

265,000

+6

19

305,000

+6

20

355,000

+6

System Reference Document 5.2.1

Gaining a Level
When you gain a level, follow these steps:

1: Choose a Class. Most characters advance in the
same class. However, you might decide to gain a
level in another class using the rules in the “Multiclassing” section.
2: Adjust Hit Points and Hit Point Dice. Each time
you gain a level, you gain an additional Hit Die.
Roll that die, add your Constitution modifier to
the roll, and add the total (minimum of 1) to your
Hit Point maximum. Instead of rolling, you can
use the fixed value shown in the Fixed Hit Points
by Class table.

Fixed Hit Points by Class
Class

Hit Points per Level

Barbarian

7 + Con. modifier

Fighter, Paladin, or Ranger

6 + Con. modifier

Bard, Cleric, Druid, Monk,
Rogue, or Warlock

5 + Con. modifier

Sorcerer or Wizard

4 + Con. modifier

3: Record New Class Features. Look at your class
features table in “Classes,” and note the features
you gain at your new level in that class. Make any
choices offered by a new feature.
4: Adjust Proficiency Bonus. A character’s Proficiency Bonus increases at certain levels, as
shown in the Character Advancement table and
your class features table in “Classes.” When your
Proficiency Bonus increases, increase all the
numbers on your character sheet that include
your Proficiency Bonus.
5: Adjust Ability Modifiers. If you choose a feat
that increases one or more of your ability scores,
your ability modifier also changes if the new
score is an even number. When that happens, adjust all the numbers on your character sheet that
use that ability modifier. When your Constitution
modifier increases by 1, your Hit Point maximum
increases by 1 for each level you have attained.
For example, if a character reaches level 8 and
increases their Constitution score from 17 to 18,
the Constitution modifier increases to +4. The
character’s Hit Point maximum then increases by
8, in addition to the Hit Points gained for reaching level 8.

Tiers of Play

With each new level, characters acquire new capabilities that equip them to handle greater challenges. As characters advance in level, the tone of
the game also changes, and the stakes of the campaign get higher. It’s helpful to think of a character’s
(and a campaign’s) arc in terms of four tiers of play,

describing the journey from a level 1 character just
beginning an adventuring career to the epic heights
of level 20. These tiers don’t have any rules associated with them; they point to the fact that the play
experience evolves as characters gain levels.

Tier 1 (Levels 1–4)

In tier 1, characters are apprentice adventurers,
though they are already set apart from the broader
populace by virtue of their extraordinary abilities.
They learn their starting class features and choose
a subclass. The threats they face usually pose a danger to local farmsteads or villages.

Tier 2 (Levels 5–10)

In tier 2, characters are full-fledged adventurers.
Spellcasters gain iconic spells such as Fireball, Lightning Bolt, and Raise Dead. Most weapon-focused
classes gain the ability to make multiple attacks
in a round. The characters now face dangers that
threaten cities and kingdoms.

Tier 3 (Levels 11–16)

In tier 3, characters have reached a level of power
that makes them special among adventurers. At
level 11, many spell­casters learn reality-altering
spells. Other characters gain features that allow
them to make more attacks or to do more impressive things with those attacks. These adventurers
often confront threats to whole regions.

Tier 4 (Levels 17–20)

At tier 4, characters achieve the pinnacle of their
class features, becoming heroic archetypes. The
fate of the world or even the order of the multiverse
might hang in the balance during their adventures.

Starting at Higher Levels

Your GM might start your group’s characters at a
level higher than 1. It is particularly recommended
to start at level 3 if your group is composed of seasoned D&D players.

Creating Your Character

Creating a higher-level character uses the same
character-creation steps outlined in this chapter
and the rules for advancing beyond level 1 provided

Starting Equipment at Higher Levels
Starting Level

24

Bonus Feats at Level 20
A GM can use feats as a form of advancement after
characters reach level 20 to provide greater power
to characters who have no more levels to gain. With
this approach, each character gains one feat of their
choice for every 30,000 XP the character earns
above 355,000 XP. Epic Boon feats are especially
appropriate for these bonus feats, but a player can
choose any feat for which their level 20 character
qualifies.

in the “Level Advancement” section. You begin with
the minimum amount of XP required to reach your
starting level. For example, if the GM starts you at
level 10, you have 64,000 XP.

Starting Equipment

The GM decides whether your character starts with
more than the standard equipment for a level 1
character, possibly even one or more magic items.
The Starting Equipment at Higher Levels table is a
guide for the GM.
Also, check with your GM about what equipment
is available for you to buy with your starting money.
For example, the firearms described in “Equipment”
are too expensive for level 1 characters, but they
might be available for purchase if your GM allows
them.

Multiclassing

Multiclassing allows you to gain levels in multiple
classes. With this rule, you have the option of gaining a level in a new class whenever you advance in
level instead of gaining a level in your current class.
Doing so lets you mix the abilities of those classes
to realize a character concept that might not be reflected in a single class.

Prerequisites

To qualify for a new class, you must have a score of
at least 13 in the primary ability of the new class
and your current classes. For example, a Barbarian
who decides to multiclass into the Druid class must
have Strength and Wisdom scores of 13 or higher,

Equipment and Money

Magic Items

2–4

Normal starting equipment

1 Common

5–10

500 GP plus 1d10 × 25 GP plus
normal starting equipment

1 Common, 1 Uncommon

11–16

5,000 gp plus 1d10 × 250 GP plus
normal starting equipment

2 Common, 3 Uncommon, 1 Rare

17–20

20,000 GP plus 1d10 × 250 GP plus
normal starting equipment

2 Common, 4 Uncommon, 3 Rare, 1 Very Rare

System Reference Document 5.2.1

since Strength is the primary ability for Barbarians
and Wisdom is the primary ability for Druids.

Experience Points

The Experience Point cost to gain a level is based on
your total character level, not your level in a particular class, as shown in the Character Advancement
table in “Character Creation.” For example, if you
are a level 6 Cleric / level 1 Fighter, you must gain
enough XP to reach level 8 before you can take your
second level as a Fighter or your seventh level as a
Cleric.

Hit Points and Hit Point Dice

You gain the Hit Points from your new class as described for levels after 1. You gain the level 1 Hit
Points for a class only when your total character
level is 1.
Add together the Hit Dice granted by all your
classes to form your pool of Hit Dice. If these dice
are the same die type, you can pool them together.
For example, both the Fighter and the Paladin have
a d10 Hit Die, so if you are a level 5 Fighter / level 5
Paladin, you have ten d10 Hit Dice. If your classes
give you Hit Dice of different types, track them separately. If you are a level 5 Cleric / level 5 Paladin,
for example, you have five d8 Hit Dice and five d10
Hit Dice.

Proficiency Bonus

Your Proficiency Bonus is based on your total character level, not your level in a particular class, as
shown in the Character Advancement table. For
example, if you are a level 3 Fighter / level 2 Rogue,
you have the Proficiency Bonus of a level 5 character, which is +3.

Proficiencies

When you gain your first level in a class other than
your initial class, you gain only some of the new
class’s starting proficiencies, as detailed in each
class’s description in “Classes.”

Class Features

When you gain a new level in a class, you get its features for that level. A few features have additional
rules when you’re multiclassing. Check the information about multiclassing included in each of your
classes’ descriptions.
Special rules apply to Extra Attack, Spellcasting,
and features (such as Unarmored Defense) that give
you alternative ways to calculate your Armor Class.

Armor Class

If you have multiple ways to calculate your Armor
Class, you can benefit from only one at a time.
For example, a Monk/Sorcerer with a Monk’s

25

System Reference Document 5.2.1

Unarmored Defense feature and a Sorcerer’s Draconic Resilience feature must choose only one of
those features as a way to calculate Armor Class.

Extra Attack

If you gain the Extra Attack feature from more than
one class, the features don’t stack. You can’t make
more than two attacks with this feature unless you
have a feature that says you can (such as the Fighter’s Two Extra Attacks feature).
Similarly, the Warlock’s Thirsting Blade invocation, which grants you the Extra Attack feature
with your pact weapon, doesn’t give you additional
attacks if you also have Extra Attack.

Spellcasting

Your capacity for spellcasting depends partly on
your combined levels in all your spellcasting classes
and partly on your individual levels in those classes.
Once you have the Spellcasting feature from more
than one class, use the rules below. If you multiclass
but have the Spellcasting feature from only one
class, follow the rules for that class.
Spells Prepared. You determine what spells you
can prepare for each class individually, as if you
were a single-classed member of that class. If you
are a level 4 Ranger / level 3 Sorcerer, for example,
you can prepare five level 1 Ranger spells, and you
can prepare six Sorcerer spells of level 1 or 2 (as
well as four Sorcerer cantrips).
Each spell you prepare is associated with one of
your classes, and you use the spellcasting ability of
that class when you cast the spell.
Cantrips. If a cantrip of yours increases in power
at higher levels, the increase is based on your total
character level, not your level in a particular class,
unless the spell says otherwise.
Spell Slots. You determine your available spell
slots by adding together the following:
• All your levels in the Bard, Cleric, Druid, Sorcerer,
and Wizard classes
• Half your levels (round up) in the Paladin and
Ranger classes

Then look up this total level in the Level column of
the Multiclass Spellcaster table. You use the slots for
that level to cast spells of an appropriate level from
any class whose Spellcasting feature you have.
This table might give you spell slots of a higher
level than the spells you prepare. You can use those
slots but only to cast your lower-level spells. If a
lower-level spell that you cast, like Burning Hands,
has an enhanced effect when cast at a higher level,
you can use the enhanced effect as normal.
For example, if you are a level 4 Ranger / level 3
Sorcerer, you count as a level 5 character when determining your spell slots, counting all your levels
as a Sorcerer and half your Ranger levels. As shown

in the Multiclass Spellcaster table, you have four
level 1 spell slots, three level 2 slots, and two level 3
slots. However, you can’t prepare any level 3 spells,
nor can you prepare any level 2 Ranger spells. You
can use the spell slots of those levels to cast the
spells you do prepare—and potentially enhance
their effects.
Pact Magic. If you have the Pact Magic feature
from the Warlock class and the Spellcasting feature,
you can use the spell slots you gain from Pact Magic
to cast spells you have prepared from classes with
the Spellcasting feature, and you can use the spell
slots you gain from the Spellcasting feature to cast
Warlock spells you have prepared.

Multiclass Spellcaster:
Spell Slots per Spell Level

1d100 Trinket

01

A mummified goblin hand

02

A crystal that faintly glows in moonlight

03

A gold coin minted in an unknown land

04

A diary written in a language you don’t know

05

A brass ring that never tarnishes

06

An old chess piece made from glass

07

A pair of knucklebone dice, each with a skull
symbol on the side that would normally show
six pips

08

A small idol depicting a nightmarish creature
that gives you unsettling dreams when you
sleep near it

09

A lock of someone’s hair

10

The deed for a parcel of land in a realm unknown to you

11

A 1-ounce block made from an unknown
material

12

A small cloth doll skewered with needles

13

A tooth from an unknown beast

14

An enormous scale, perhaps from a dragon

15

A bright-green feather

16

An old divination card bearing your likeness

17

A glass orb filled with moving smoke

18

A 1-pound egg with a bright-red shell

19

A pipe that blows bubbles

20

A glass jar containing a bit of flesh floating in
pickling fluid

21

A gnome-crafted music box that plays a song
you dimly remember from your childhood

Level

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

1

2

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

2

3

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

3

4

2

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

4

4

3

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

5

4

3

2

—

—

—

—

—

—

6

4

3

3

—

—

—

—

—

—

7

4

3

3

1

—

—

—

—

—

8

4

3

3

2

—

—

—

—

—

9

4

3

3

3

1

—

—

—

—

10

4

3

3

3

2

—

—

—

—

11

4

3

3

3

2

1

—

—

—

12

4

3

3

3

2

1

—

—

—

13

4

3

3

3

2

1

1

—

—

14

4

3

3

3

2

1

1

—

—

15

4

3

3

3

2

1

1

1

—

16

4

3

3

3

2

1

1

1

—

22

A wooden statuette of a smug halfling
A brass orb etched with strange runes

17

4

3

3

3

2

1

1

1

1

23

18

4

3

3

3

3

1

1

1

1

24

A multicolored stone disk

19

4

3

3

3

3

2

1

1

1

25

A silver icon of a raven

20

4

3

3

3

3

2

2

1

1

26

A bag containing forty-seven teeth, one of
which is rotten

27

A shard of obsidian that always feels warm to
the touch

28

A dragon’s talon strung on a leather necklace

29

A pair of old socks

30

A blank book whose pages refuse to hold ink,
chalk, graphite, or any other marking

31

A silver badge that is a five-pointed star

32

A knife that belonged to a relative

33

A glass vial filled with nail clippings

34

A rectangular metal device with two tiny metal
cups on one end that throws sparks when wet

Trinkets
When you make your character, you can roll once
on the Trinkets table to gain a Tiny trinket, a simple
item lightly touched by mystery. The GM might also
use this table. It can help stock a room in a dungeon
or fill a creature’s pockets.

26

Trinkets

System Reference Document 5.2.1

1d100 Trinket

27

35

A white, sequined glove sized for a human

36

A vest with one hundred tiny pockets

37

1d100 Trinket

73

An eggshell painted with scenes of misery in
disturbing detail

A weightless stone

74

A fan that, when unfolded, shows a sleepy cat

38

A sketch of a goblin

75

A set of bone pipes

39

An empty glass vial that smells of perfume

76

40

A gemstone that looks like a lump of coal when
examined by anyone but you

A four-leaf clover pressed inside a book discussing manners and etiquette

77

41

A scrap of cloth from an old banner

A sheet of parchment upon which is drawn a
mechanical contraption

42

A rank insignia from a lost legionnaire

78

43

A silver bell without a clapper

An ornate scabbard that fits no blade you have
found

44

A mechanical canary inside a lamp

79

45

A miniature chest carved to look like it has numerous feet on the bottom

An invitation to a party where a murder
happened

80

46

A dead sprite inside a clear glass bottle

A bronze pentacle with an etching of a rat’s
head in its center

47

A metal can that has no opening but sounds as
if it is filled with liquid, sand, spiders, or broken
glass (your choice)

81

A purple handkerchief embroidered with the
name of an archmage

82

48

A glass orb filled with water, in which swims a
clockwork goldfish

Half a floor plan for a temple, a castle, or another structure

83

49

A silver spoon with an M engraved on the handle

A bit of folded cloth that, when unfolded, turns
into a stylish cap

50

A whistle made from gold-colored wood

84

A receipt of deposit at a bank in a far-off city

51

A dead scarab beetle the size of your hand

85

A diary with seven missing pages

52

Two toy soldiers, one missing a head

86

An empty silver snuffbox bearing the inscription “dreams” on its lid

53

A small box filled with different-sized buttons

87

54

A candle that can’t be lit

An iron holy symbol devoted to an unknown
god

55

A miniature cage with no door

88

56

An old key

A book about a legendary hero’s rise and fall,
with the last chapter missing

57

An indecipherable treasure map

89

A vial of dragon blood

58

A hilt from a broken sword

90

An ancient arrow of elven design

59

A rabbit’s foot

91

A needle that never bends

60

A glass eye

92

An ornate brooch of dwarven design

61

A cameo of a hideous person

93

62

A silver skull the size of a coin

63

An alabaster mask

An empty wine bottle bearing a pretty label
that says, “The Wizard of Wines Winery, Red
Dragon Crush, 331422-W”

64

A cone of sticky black incense that stinks

94

A mosaic tile with a multicolored, glazed
surface

65

A nightcap that gives you pleasant dreams
when you wear it

95

A petrified mouse

66

A single caltrop made from bone

96

A black pirate flag adorned with a dragon’s
skull and crossbones

67

A gold monocle frame without the lens

97

68

A 1-inch cube, each side a different color

A tiny mechanical crab or spider that moves
about when it’s not being observed

98

A glass jar containing lard with a label that
reads, “Griffon Grease”

99

A wooden box with a ceramic bottom that
holds a living worm with a head on each end of
its body

00

A metal urn containing the ashes of a hero

69

A crystal doorknob

70

A packet filled with pink dust

71

A fragment of a beautiful song, written as musical notes on two pieces of parchment

72

A silver teardrop earring containing a real
teardrop

System Reference Document 5.2.1